Unofficial Translation Commissioned by International IDEA.
Registered No. D A-1
Bangladesh Gazette
 Additional Issue
 Published by the Authority
Thursday, 13th November. 2025
People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Ministry of Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs
Legislative and Parliamentary Affairs Division
Printing and Publication Brach
Order
Date: 28 Kartik, 1432 B.S./13 November, 2025 A.D.
No. 1 (Printing and Publication) — By order of the President of the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh, the following order is hereby published for public
information.
Order No. 01, 2025
Implementation Order of the July National Charter
(Constitutional Reform), 2025
Whereas, in continuation of a prolonged democratic
struggle, the successful mass uprising of students and
citizens in Bangladesh during July–August 2024 has
manifested the sovereign will and authority of the people;
and
Whereas, as a result of the said uprising, the fascist
regime in power at that time was overthrown on 5 August
2024 (21 Srabon 1431), the National Parliament was 
Unofficial Translation Commissioned by International IDEA.
dissolved on 6 August 2024 (22 Srabon 1431), and the
present Interim Government was formed on 8 August 2024
(24 Srabon 1431), which has since received both national and
international legitimacy and recognition; and
Whereas, with a view to establishing good governance,
democracy, and social justice through institutional reforms,
and to prevent any recurrence of authoritarian and fascist
rule, the Interim Government formed six reform commissions
tasked with proposing reforms in the constitution, electoral
system, public administration, judiciary, police
administration, and anti-corruption mechanisms; and the
said commissions have submitted their respective reports to
the government; and
Whereas, in pursuit of building national consensus on
the recommendations contained in the aforesaid reports, the
government constituted the National Consensus Commission
on 12 February 2025 (29 Magh 1432); and
Whereas, the National Consensus Commission, through
dialogue with all political parties and alliances that
participated in the mass uprising, drafted the July National
Charter 2025 incorporating recommendations for
constitutional and other reforms, and the said Charter has
been jointly signed and affirmed for implementation by those
political parties and alliances; and
Whereas, the proposals for constitutional reform as
contained in the July National Charter require approval from
the sovereign people, and for that purpose, it is necessary to
hold a referendum, establish a Constitutional Reform
Assembly, and entrust that Assembly with the task of
reforming the Constitution; and
Whereas, it is essential to issue a formal order to execute
the implementation of the July National Charter 2025 as
stated above;
Unofficial Translation Commissioned by International IDEA.
Therefore, under the authority of the sovereign will
expressed by the people through the successful student–
mass uprising in July–August 2024, and upon the advice of
the Interim Government, the President hereby issues the
following Order:—
1. Short Title and Commencement.—
(1) This Order shall be called the July National Charter
(Constitutional Reform) Implementation Order, 2025.
(2) This Order shall—
(a) come into immediate effect with respect to
Sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 12, and 15; and
(b) come into effect, subject to the referendum
yielding a majority “Yes” vote, on the date of its
publication in the official Gazette with respect
to Sections 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, and 14.
2. Definitions.—In this Order, unless the context or
subject otherwise requires,—
(a) “Referendum” means the referendum held
under the authority of this Order;
(b) “July Uprising” means the student–mass
uprising that took place in Bangladesh during
July–August 2024;
(c) “July National Charter” means the July National
Charter 2025 signed by the political parties and
alliances, and by the National Consensus
Commission constituted by the Interim
Government;
(d) “National Parliament” means the Jatiya Sangsad
constituted under Article 65 of the Constitution;
(e) “Election Commission” means the Election
Commission constituted under Article 118 of
the Constitution;
Unofficial Translation Commissioned by International IDEA.
(f) “Elected Representative” means a Member of
the National Parliament as defined in clause (2)
of Article 65 of the Constitution;
(g) “Council” means the Constitutional Reform
Council constituted under Section 7 of this
Order;
(h) “Chairperson” means the person presiding over
a meeting of the Council as provided in Section
9 of this Order;
(i) “Constitution” means the Constitution of the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh; and
(j) “Parliamentary Election” means the general
election of the National Parliament held
immediately following the promulgation of this
Order.
3. Referendum on Constitutional Reform Proposals in
the July National Charter.—For the purpose of
exercising the sovereign authority of the people, this
Order and the constitutional reform provisions
contained in the July National Charter shall be
submitted to a referendum.
4. Question to be Presented on the Referendum
Ballot.—
(1) The following question shall be presented in the
referendum:
“Do you consent to the July National Charter
(Constitutional Reform) Implementation Order,
2025, and to the following proposals on
constitutional
reform as set forth in the July National Charter?”
(Yes/No):
(a) The caretaker government during elections,
the Election Commission, and other
constitutional institutions shall be formed in 
Unofficial Translation Commissioned by International IDEA.
accordance with the procedures described in
the July Charter.
(b) The next National Parliament shall be
bicameral. A 100-member upper chamber
shall be constituted based on the proportion
of votes received by political parties in the
national parliamentary election, and any
constitutional amendment shall require
approval by a majority of the upper chamber.
(c) The political parties shall be obligated to
implement the thirty reform proposals agreed
upon in the July National Charter including
increased representation of women in
Parliament, election of the Deputy Speaker
and several committee chairs from the
opposition, term limitation for the Prime
Minister, enhancement of the powers of the
President, protection of fundamental rights,
independence of the judiciary, and
strengthening of local government.
(d) Other reforms described in the July National
Charter shall be implemented in accordance
with the commitments of the political parties.
(2) The referendum shall be conducted by ballot, and
each voter shall cast their vote in secret on a ballot
determined by the Election Commission.
5. Holding of Referendum.—The referendum under this
Order shall be held on the same day as the general
election to the National Parliament immediately
following the promulgation of this Order.
6. Legislation for Holding the Referendum.—
Appropriate legislation shall be enacted to enable the
Election Commission to take necessary measures for
holding the referendum.
Unofficial Translation Commissioned by International IDEA.
7. Constitution of the Constitutional Reform Council, Its
Functions and Dissolution.—
(1) If the majority of votes cast in response to the
question presented in the referendum are in the
affirmative (Yes), then—
(a) a Constitutional Reform Council shall be
constituted, comprising the elected
representatives from the general election to
the National Parliament held immediately
following the promulgation of this Order, and
the Council shall have full authority to carry
out constitutional reforms;
(b) the elected representatives from the said
election shall serve concurrently as Members
of the National Parliament and as Members of
the Constitutional Reform Council under this
Order;
(c) the Council shall complete the constitutional
reform, in accordance with the July National
Charter and the outcome of the referendum,
within 180 (one hundred and eighty) working
days from the date of commencement of its
first session, upon which the Council shall be
dissolved.
(2) While participating in the proceedings of the Council,
the elected representatives shall be referred to as
Members of the Council.
(3) For the purposes of this Order, the Council shall
determine its own rules of procedure regarding the
summoning and adjournment of its sessions, the
manner of introducing proposals on constitutional
reform, their deliberation and adoption, and all other
related matters.
(4) The Secretariat of the National Parliament shall
provide secretarial support to the Council.
Unofficial Translation Commissioned by International IDEA.
8. Oath and Administration of Oath.—
(1) After taking the oath as Members of Parliament, the
elected representatives shall, in the same oathtaking ceremony, take the oath as Members of the
Council in the form set out in Schedule 1 of this Order,
and shall sign the oath accordingly.
(2) The person who administers the oath to the elected
Members of Parliament shall also administer the
oath to the Members of the Council in the form
prescribed in Schedule 1 of this Order.
9. Chairperson of the Council.—
(1) At the first meeting of the Council’s first session, the
Members of the Council shall elect a Chairperson and
a Deputy Chairperson; until such election is held, the
senior-most Member, with the consent of the
majority of Members, shall preside over the meeting
as Chairperson.
(2) In the absence of both the Chairperson and the
Deputy Chairperson, any Member of the Council
shall preside over the proceedings in accordance
with the rules of procedure of the Council.
10.Summoning of Council Sessions, Quorum, Voting,
etc.—
(1) The first session of the Council shall be summoned,
in the same manner as the first session of the
National Parliament, within 30 (thirty) calendar
days of the declaration of election results.
(2) The presence of at least 60 (sixty) Members of the
Council shall be required for conducting its
proceedings.
(3) Any proposal concerning constitutional reform shall
be adopted by a majority of the total Members of the
Council; decisions on all other matters shall be made
by a majority of the Members present and voting:
Unofficial Translation Commissioned by International IDEA.
Provided that, in the case of a tie, the Chairperson shall
cast the deciding vote.
11.Special Privileges and Immunities of the Council and
Its Members.—The validity of any proceedings of the
Council, and the special privileges and immunities of
the Members of the Council, shall be equivalent to
those of the National Parliament and its Members.
12.Incorporation of the July National Charter into the
Constitution.—In accordance with the Declaration of
Commitment to the implementation of the July
National Charter, measures shall be taken to
incorporate the July National Charter into the
Constitution.
13.Immediate Implementation of Constitutional
Reforms.—
(1) Upon completion of the constitutional reform as
referred to in sub-section (1)(c) of Section 7 of this
Order, all reforms that are capable of immediate
implementation shall be so implemented without
delay, and the Government shall take all appropriate
measures to that end.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section
(1), within 30 (thirty) working days of the
completion of the constitutional reform under subsection (1)(c) of Section 7, an upper chamber of the
National Parliament shall be constituted under the
system of proportional representation (PR) based on
the votes received in the election to the lower
chamber of the National Parliament, and its scope of
functions shall be determined.
(3) The term of the upper chamber constituted under
sub-section (2) shall commence from the date of its
oath-taking and shall continue until the last day of 
Unofficial Translation Commissioned by International IDEA.
the term of the lower chamber of the National
Parliament.
(4) It shall not be required to publish a list of candidates
for the upper chamber at the time of the National
Parliamentary election held immediately following
the promulgation of this Order.
(5) For the purpose of removing any impediment to the
constitution of the upper chamber under sub-section
(2), the Council may enact necessary provisions, and
the Government may issue necessary directives.
14.Finalization and Publication of Constitutional Reform
by the Council.—
(1) The constitutional reform adopted by the Council
shall be deemed final, and no further approval or
consent shall be required in respect thereof.
(2) The full text of the constitutional reform adopted by
the Council, along with the full text of the
Constitution as amended thereby, shall be published
by the Government in the official Gazette without
delay.
15.Issuance of Directives by the Government.—For the
purpose of implementing the provisions of this Order,
the Government may issue necessary directives.
Unofficial Translation Commissioned by International IDEA.
Schedule–1
[See Section 8]
Oath Form for Members of the Constitutional
Reform Council
The person administering the oath to the elected
representatives in the National Parliament shall also administer
the following oath to the Members of the Council:
“I,…………………………………………………………………………………………
……..being appointed as a Member of the Constitutional Reform
Council, do solemnly swear that I will faithfully discharge the
duties I am about to undertake in accordance with law and with
integrity;
I will bear true faith and allegiance to Bangladesh; and
I will not allow my personal interests to influence the discharge
of my duties as a Member of the Council.”
Date: 28 Kartik, 1432 B.S. Md. Shahabuddin
13 November, 2025 A.D. President
People’s Republic of
Bangladesh
Dr. Hafiz Ahmed Chowdhury
Secretary