2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 1/47
অধায় এর নাম I
INTRODUCTION
The Penal Code, 1860
( ACT NO. XLV Of 1860 )
1
[ 6th October, 1860 ]
Preamble WHEREAS it is expedient to provide a general Penal Code for Bangladesh;
It is enacted as follows:-
Title and
extent of
operation of
the Code
1. This Act shall be called the [Penal Code], and shall take effect
throughout Bangladesh.
2
Punishment
of offences
committed
within
Bangladesh
2. Every person shall be liable to punishment under this Code and not
otherwise for every act or omission contrary to the provisions thereof, of
which he shall be guilty within Bangladesh.
Punishment
of offences
committed
beyond, but
which by
law may be
tried within
Bangladesh
3. Any person liable, by any Bangladesh Law, to be tried for an offence
committed beyond Bangladesh shall be dealt with according to the
provisions of this Code for any act committed beyond Bangladesh in the
same manner as if such act had been committed within Bangladesh.
Extension
of Code to
extraterritorial
offences
4. The provisions of this Code apply also to any offence committed by-
(1) any citizen of Bangladesh in any place without and beyond Bangladesh;
(2) [Omitted by Article 2 and Schedule of the Central Laws (Adaptation)
Order, 1961.]
(3) [Omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws
(Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).]
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 2/47
অধায় এর নাম II
GENERAL EXPLANATIONS
(4) any person on any ship or aircraft registered in Bangladesh wherever it
may be.
Explanation.-In this section the word "offence" includes every act committed
outside Bangladesh which, if committed in Bangladesh, would be punishable
under this Code.
Illustrations
(a) A, a Bangladesh subject, commits a murder in Uganda. He can be tried
and convicted of murder in any place in Bangladesh in which he may be
found.
(b) B, a European British subject, commits a murder in [Rangpur]. He can
be tried and convicted of murder in any place in Bangladesh in which he
may be found.
(c) C, a foreigner who is in the service of the Bangladesh Government,
commits a murder in [Khulna]. He can be tried and convicted of murder at
any place in Bangladesh in which he may be found.
(d) D, a British subject living in [Khulna], instigates E to commit a murder in
[Chittagong]. D is guilty of abetting murder.
3
4
5
6
Certain laws
not to be
affected by
this Act
5. Nothing in this Act is intended to repeal, vary, suspend, or affect [* * *]
any of the provisions of any Act for punishing mutiny and desertion of
officers, soldiers, sailors or airmen in the service of the [Republic], or of any
special or local law.
7
8
Definitions
in the Code
to be
understood
subject to
exceptions
6. Throughout this Code every definition of an offence, every penal provision
and every illustration of every such definition or penal provision, shall be
understood subject to the exceptions contained in the chapter entitled
"General Exceptions," though those exceptions are not repeated in such
definition, penal provision or illustration.
Illustrations
(a) The sections in this Code, which contain definitions of offences, do not
express that a child under seven years of age cannot commit such offences;
but the definitions are to be understood subject to the general exception
which provides that nothing shall be an offence which is done by a child
under seven years of age.
(b) A, a police officer, without warrant, apprehends Z who has committed
murder. Here A is not guilty of the offence of wrongful confinement; for he
was bound by law to apprehend Z, and therefore the case falls within the
general exception which provides that "nothing is an offence which is done
by a person who is bound by law to do it".
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 3/47
Sense of
expression
once
explained
7. Every expression which is explained in any part of this Code is used in
every part of this Code in conformity with the explanation.
Gender 8. The pronoun "he" and its derivatives are used of any person, whether
male or female.
Number 9. Unless the contrary appears from the context, words importing the
singular number include the plural number, and words importing the plural
number include the singular number.
“Man”
“Woman”
10. The word “man” denotes a male human being of any age: the word
“woman” denotes a female human being of any age.
“Person” 11. The word “person” includes any Company or Association, or body of
persons, whether incorporated or not.
“Public” 12. The word “public” includes any class of the public or any community.
[Omitted] 13. [Omitted by Article 2 and Schedule of the Central Laws (Adaptation)
Order, 1961.]
“Servant of
the State”
14. The words [Servant of the Republic] denote all officers or servant,
continued, appointed or employed in Bangladesh by or under the authority
of the Government.
9
[Repealed] 15. [Repealed by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws)
Order, 1937.]
[Repealed] 16. [Repealed by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws)
Order, 1937.]
“Government” 17. The word “Government” denotes the person or persons authorized by
law to administer executive Government in Bangladesh, or in any part
thereof.
[Repealed] 18. [Repealed by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws)
Order, 1937.]
“Judge” 19. The word “Judge” denotes not only every person who is officially
designed as a Judge, but also every person,-
who is empowered by law to give, in any legal proceeding, civil or criminal, a
definitive judgment, or a judgment which, if not appealed against, would be
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 4/47
definitive, or a judgment which, if confirmed by some other authority, would
be definitive, or
who is one of a body of persons, which body of persons is empowered by
law to give such a judgment.
Illustrations
(a) A Collector exercising jurisdiction in a suit under Act X of 1859, is a
Judge.
(b) A Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in respect of a charge on which he
has power to sentence to fine or imprisonment with or without appeal, is a
Judge.
(c) [Repealed by the Federal Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act 1951 (Act
XXXVI of 1951)].
(d) A Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in respect of a charge on which he
has power only to commit for trial to another Court, is not a Judge.
“Court of
justice”
20. The words "Court of Justice" denote a Judge who is empowered by law
to act judicially alone, or a body of Judges which is empowered by law to act
judicially as a body, when such Judge or body of Judges is acting judicially.
“Public
servant”
21. The words "public servant" denote a person falling under any of the
descriptions hereinafter following, namely:-
First.-[Omitted by section 2 of the Penal Code (Amendment) Ordinance,
1982 (Ordinance No. X of 1982)];
Second. Every Commissioned Officer in the Military, Naval or Air Forces of
Bangladesh [* * *];
[Third.- Every Judge including any person empowered by any law to
perform, whether by himself or as a member of any body of persons, any
adjudicatory function;]
Fourth.- very officer of a Court of Justice whose duty it is, as such officer, to
investigate or report on any matter of law or fact, or to make, authenticate,
or keep any document, or to take charge or dispose of any property, or to
execute any judicial process, or to administer any oath, or to interpret, or to
preserve order in the Court; and every person specially authorized by a
Court of Justice to perform any of such duties;
Fifth.-Every juryman, assessor, or member of a panchayat assisting a Court
of Justice or public servant;
Sixth.-Every arbitrator or other person to whom any cause or matter has
been referred for decision or report by any Court of Justice, or by any other
competent public authority;
Seventh.-Every person who holds any office by virtue of which he is
empowered to place or keep any person in confinement;
10
11
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 5/47
Eighth.-Every officer of the Government whose duty it is, as such officer, to
prevent offences, to give information of offences, to bring offenders to
justice, or to protect the public health, safety or convenience;
Ninth.-Every officer whose duty it is, such officer, to take, receive, keep or
expend any property on behalf of the Government, or to make any survey,
assessment or contract on behalf of the Government, or to execute any
revenue-process, or to investigate, or to report, on any matter affecting the
pecuniary interests of the Government, or to make, authenticate or keep any
document relating to the pecuniary interest of the Government, or to prevent
the infraction of any law for the protection of the pecuniary interests of the
Government [* * *];
Tenth.-Every officer whose duty it is, as such officer, to take, receive, keep or
expend any property, to make any survey or assessment or to levy any rate
or tax for any secular common purpose of any village, town or district, or to
make, authenticate or keep any document for the ascertaining of the rights
of the people of any village, town or district;
Eleventh.-Every person who holds any office in virtue of which he is
empowered to prepare, publish, maintain or revise an electoral roll or to
conduct an election or part of an election.
Illustration
A Municipal Commissioner is a public servant.
[Twelfth.-Every person-
(a) in the service or pay of the Government or remunerated by the
Government by fees or commissions for the performance of any public duty;
(b) in the service or pay of a local authority or of a corporation, body or
authority established by or under any law or of a firm or company in which
any part of the interest or share capital is held by, or vested in, the
Government.]
Explanation 1.-Persons falling under any of the above descriptions are
public servants, whether appointed by the Government or not.
Explanation 2.-Wherever the words "public servant" occur, they shall be
understood of every person who is in actual possession of the situation of a
public servant, whatever legal defect there may be in his right to hold that
situation.
Explanation 3.-The word "election" denotes an election for the purpose of
selecting members of any legislative, municipal or other public authority, of
whatever character, the method of selection to which is by, or under, any law
prescribed as by election.
12
13
“Moveable
property”
22. The words "moveable property" are intended to include corporeal
property of every description, except land and thing attached to the earth or
permanently fastened to any thing which is attached to the earth.
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 6/47
“Wrongful
gain”
23. "Wrongful gain" is gain by unlawful means of property to which the
person gaining is not legally entitled.
“Wrongful
loss”
"Wrongful loss" is the loss by unlawful means of property to which the
person losing it is legally entitled.
Losing
wrongfully.
A person is said to gain wrongfully when such person retains wrongfully, as
well as when such person acquires wrongfully. A person is said to loss
wrongfully when such person is wrongfully kept out of any property, as well
as when such person is wrongfully deprived of property.
“Dishonestly” 24. Whoever does anything with the intention of causing wrongful gain to
one person or wrongful loss to another person, is said to do that thing
"dishonestly".
“Fraudulently" 25. A person is said to do a thing fraudulently if he does that thing with intent
to defraud but not otherwise.
“Reason to
believe”
26. A person is said to have "reason to believe" a thing if he has sufficient
cause to believe that thing but not otherwise.
Property in
possession
of wife,
clerk or
servant.
27. When property is in the possession of a person's wife, clerk or servant,
on account of that person, it is in that person's possession within the
meaning of this Code.
Explanation.-A person employed temporarily or on a particular occasion in
the capacity of a clerk, or servant, is a clerk or servant within the meaning of
this section.
“Counterfeit” 28. A person is said to "counterfeit" who causes one thing to resemble
another thing, intending by means of that resemblance to practice
deception, or knowing it to be likely that deception will thereby be practiced.
Explanation 1.-It is not essential to counterfeiting that the imitation should be
exact.
Explanation 2.-When a person causes one thing to resemble another thing,
and resemblance is such that a person might be deceived thereby, it shall
be presumed, until the contrary is proved, that the person so causing the
one thing to resemble the other thing intended by means of that
resemblance to practice deception or knew it to be likely that deception
would thereby be practiced.
“Document” 29. The word "document" denotes any matter expressed or described upon
any substance by means of letters, figures, marks, or by more than one of
those means, intended to be used, or which may be used, as evidence of
that matter.
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 7/47
Explanation 1.-It is immaterial by what means or upon what substance the
letters, figures or marks are formed, or whether the evidence is intended for,
or may be used in a Court of Justice, or not.
Illustrations
A writing expressing the terms of a contract, which may be used as
evidence of the contract, is a document.
A cheque upon a banker is a document.
A Power-of-Attorney is a document.
A map or plan which is intended to be used or which may be used as
evidence, is a document.
A writing containing directions or instructions is a document.
Explanation 2.-Whatever is expressed by means of letters, figures or marks
as explained by mercantile or other usage, shall be deemed to be expressed
by such letters, figures or marks within the meaning of this section, although
the same may not be actually expressed.
Illustration
A writes his name on the back of a bill of exchange payable to his order. The
meaning of the endorsement, as explained by mercantile usage, is that the
bill is to be paid to the holder. The endorsement is a document, and must be
construed in the same manner as if the words "pay to the holder" or words
to that effect had been written over the signature.
“Valuable
security”
30. The words "valuable security" denote a document which is, or purports
to be, a document whereby any legal right is created, extended, transferred,
restricted, extinguished or released, or whereby any person acknowledges
that he lies under legal liability, or has not a certain legal right.
Illustration
A writes his name on the back of a bill of exchange. As the effect of this
endorsement is to transfer the right to the bill to any person who may
become the lawful holder of it, the endorsement is a "valuable security".
“A will” 31. The words "a will" denote any testamentary document.
Words
referring to
acts include
illegal
omissions
32. In every part of this Code, except where a contrary intention appears
from the context, words which refer to acts done extend also to illegal
omissions.
“Act”
“Omission”
33. The word "act" denotes as well a series of acts as a single act: the word
"omission” denotes as well a series of omissions as a single omission.
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 8/47
Acts done
by several
persons in
furtherance
of common
intention
34. When a criminal act is done by several persons, in furtherance of the
common intention of all, each of such persons is liable for that act in the
same manner as if it were done by him alone.
When such
an act is
criminal by
reason of its
being done
with a
criminal
knowledge
or intention
35. Whenever an act, which is criminal only by reason of its being done with
a criminal knowledge or intention, is done by several persons, each of such
persons who joins in the act with such knowledge or intention is liable for the
act in the same manner as if the act were done by him alone with that
knowledge or intention.
Effect
caused
partly by act
and partly
by omission
36. Wherever the causing of a certain effect, or an attempt to cause that
effect, by an act or by an omission, is an offence, it is to be understood that
the causing of that effect partly by an act and partly by an omission is the
same offence.
Illustration
A intentionally causes Z's death, partly by illegally omitting to give Z food,
and partly by beating Z. A has committed murder.
Cooperation
by doing
one of
several Acts
constituting
an offence
37. When an offence is committed by means of several acts, whoever
intentionally co-operates in the commission of that offence by doing any one
of those acts, either singly or jointly with any other person, commits that
offence.
Illustrations
(a) A and B agree to murder Z by severally and at different times giving him
small doses of poison. A and B administer the poison according to the
agreement with intent to murder Z. Z dies from the effects of the several
doses of poison so administered to him. Here A and B intentionally cooperate in the commission of murder and as each of them does an act by
which the death is caused, they are both guilty of the offence though their
acts are separate.
(b) A and B are joint jailors, and as such, have the charge of Z, a prisoner,
alternately for six hours at a time. A and B, intending to cause Z's death,
knowingly co-operate in causing that effect by illegally omitting, each during
the time of his attendance, to furnish Z with food supplied to them for that
purpose. Z dies of hunger. Both A and B are guilty of the murder of Z.
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 9/47
(c) A, a jailor, has the charge of Z, a prisoner. A intending to cause Z's
death, illegally omits to supply Z with food; in consequence of which Z is
much reduced in strength, but the starvation is not sufficient to cause his
death. A is dismissed from his office, and B succeeds him. B, without
collusion or co-operation with A, illegally omits to supply Z with food,
knowing that he is likely thereby to cause Z's death. Z dies of hunger. B is
guilty of murder, but, as A did not co-operate with B, A is guilty only of an
attempt to commit murder.
Persons
concerned
in criminal
act may be
guilty of
different
offences
38. Where several persons are engaged or concerned in the commission of
a criminal act, they may be guilty of different offences by means of that act.
Illustration
A attacks Z under such circumstances of grave provocation that his killing of
Z would be only culpable homicide not amounting to murder. B having ill-will
towards Z and intending to kill him, and not having been subject to the
provocation, assists A in killing Z. Here, though A and B are both engaged in
causing Z's death, B is guilty of murder, and A is guilty only of culpable
homicide.
“Voluntarily” 39. A person is said to cause an effect "voluntarily" when he causes it by
means whereby he intended to cause it, or by means which, at the time of
employing those means, he knew or had reason to believe to be likely to
cause it.
Illustration
A sets fire, by night, to an inhabited house in a large town, for the purpose of
facilitating robbery and thus causes the death of a person. Here, A may not
have intended to cause death, and may even be sorry that death has been
caused by his act: yet, if he knew that he was likely to cause death, he has
caused death voluntarily.
“Offence” 40. Except in the chapters and sections mentioned in clauses 2 and 3 of this
section, the word "offence" denotes a thing made punishable by this Code.
In Chapter IV, Chapter VA and in the following sections, namely, sections 64,
65, 66, 67, 71, 109, 110, 112, 114, 115, 116, 117, 187, 194, 195, 203, 211,
213, 214, 221, 222, 223, 224, 225, 327, 328, 329, 330, 331, 347, 348, 388,
389 and 445, the word "offence" denotes a thing punishable under this
Code, or under any special or local law as hereinafter defined.
And in sections 141, 176, 177, 201, 202, 212, 216 and 441 the word
"offence" has the same meaning when the thing punishable under the
special or local law is punishable under such law with imprisonment for a
term of six months or upwards, whether with or without fine.
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 10/47
“Special
law”
41. A "special law" is a law applicable to a particular subject.
“Local law” 42. A "local law" is a law applicable only to a particular part of the territories
comprised in Bangladesh.
“Illegal”
“Legally
bound to
do”
43. The word “illegal” is applicable to everything which is an offence or which
is prohibited by law, or which furnishes ground for a civil action: and a
person is said to be "legally bound to do" whatever it is illegal in him to omit.
“Injury” 44. The word "injury" denotes any harm whatever illegally caused to any
person, in body, mind, reputation or property.
“Life” 45. The word "life" denotes the life of a human being, unless the contrary
appears from the context.
“Death” 46. The word "death" denotes the death of a human being, unless the
contrary appears from the context.
“Animal” 47. The word "animal" denotes any living creature, other than a human
being.
“Vessel” 48. The word “vessel” denotes anything made for the conveyance by water
of human beings or of property.
“Year”
“Month”
49. Wherever the word "year" or the word "month" is used, it is to be
understood that the year or the month is to be reckoned according to the
British calendar.
“Section” 50. The word "section" denotes one of those portions of a chapter of this
Code which are distinguished by prefixed numeral figures.
“Oath” 51. The word "oath" includes a solemn affirmation substituted by law for an
oath, and any declaration required or authorized by law to be made before a
public servant or to be used for the purpose of proof, whether in a Court of
Justice or not.
“Good
faith”
52. Nothing is said to be done or believed in "good faith" which is done or
believed without due care and attention.
“Harbour” [52A. Except in section 157, and in section 130 in the case in which the
harbour is given by the wife or husband of the person harboured, the word
"harbour" includes the supplying a person with shelter, food, drink, money,
clothes, arms, ammunition or means of conveyance, or the assisting a
14
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 11/47
অধায় এর নাম III
OF PUNISHMENTS
person by any means, whether of the same kind as those enumerated in this
section or not, to evade apprehension.]
Punishments 53. The punishments to which offenders are liable under the provisions of
this Code are,-
Firstly,- Death;
Secondly,- [Imprisonment for life];
Thirdly,-[Omitted by the Criminal Law (Extinction of Discriminatory
Privileges) Act 1949 (Act No. II of 1950].
Fourthly,-Imprisonment, which is of two descriptions, namely:-
(1) Rigorous, that is, with hard labour;
(2) Simple;
Fifthly,- Forfeiture of property;
Sixthly,- Fine.
[Explanation.-In the punishment of imprisonment for life, the imprisonment
shall be rigorous.]
15
16
Construction
of reference
to
transportation
[53A.(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), any reference to
“transportation for life” in any other law for the time being in force shall be
construed as a reference to “imprisonment for life”.
(2) Any reference to transportation for a term or to transportation for a
shorter term (by whatever named called) in any other law for the time being
in force shall be deemed to have been omitted.
(3) Any reference to “transportation” in any other law for the time being in
force shall
(a) if the expression means transportation for life, be construed as a
reference to imprisonment for life;
(b) if the expression means transportation for any shorter term, be deemed
to have been omitted.]
17
Commutation
of sentence
of death
54. In every case in which sentence of death shall have been passed, [the
Government] may, without the consent of the offender, commute the
punishment for any other punishment provided by this Code.
18
Commutation
of sentence
of [
19
55. In every case in which sentence of [imprisonment] for life shall have
been passed, [the Government] may, without the consent of the offender,
commute the punishment for imprisonment of either description for a term
not exceeding [twenty] years.
20
21
22
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 12/47
imprisonment
] for life
Saving for
President’s
prerogative
[55A. Nothing in section fifty-four or section fifty-five shall derogate from
the right of the President to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions
of punishment.]
23
[Repealed] 56. [Repealed by Schedule of the Criminal Law (Extinction of Discriminatory
Privileges Act, 1949 (Act No. II of 1950).]
Fractions of
terms of
punishment
57. In calculating fractions of terms of punishment, [imprisonment] for life
shall be reckoned as equivalent to [rigorous imprisonment for thirty years].
24
25
[Omitted] 58. [Omitted by section 6 of the Penal Code (Amendment) Ordinance, 1985
(Ordinance No. XLI of 1985).]
[Omitted] 59. [Omitted by section 6 of the Penal Code (Amendment) Ordinance, 1985
(Ordinance No. XLI of 1985).]
Sentence
may be (in
certain
cases of
imprisonment,
wholly or
partly
rigorous or
simple
60. In every case in which an offender is punishable with imprisonment
which may be of either description, it shall be competent to the Court which
sentences such offender to direct in the sentence that such imprisonment
shall be wholly rigorous, or that such imprisonment shall be wholly simple, or
that any part of such imprisonment shall be rigorous and the rest simple.
[Repealed] 61. [Repealed by section 4 of the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act,
1921 (Act No. XVI of 1921).]
[Repealed] 62. [Repealed by section 4 of the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act,
1921 (Act No. XVI of 1921).]
Amount of
fine
63. Where no sum is expressed to which a fine may extend, the amount of
fine to which the offender is liable is unlimited, but shall not be excessive.
Sentence of
imprisonment
for nonpayment of
fine
64. In every case of an offence punishable with imprisonment as well as
fine, in which the offender is sentenced to a fine, whether with or without
imprisonment,
and in every case of an offence punishable with imprisonment or fine, or
with fine only, in which the offender is sentenced to a fine,
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 13/47
it shall be competent to the Court which sentences such offender to direct by
the sentence that, in default of payment of the fine, the offender shall suffer
imprisonment for a certain term, which imprisonment shall be in excess of
any other imprisonment to which he may have been sentenced or to which
he may be liable under a commutation of a sentence.
Limit to
imprisonment
for nonpayment of
fine, when
imprisonment
and fine
awardable
65. The term for which the Court directs the offender to be imprisoned in
default of payment of a fine shall not exceed one-fourth of the term of
imprisonment which is the maximum fixed for the offence, if the offence be
punishable with imprisonment as well as fine.
Description
of
imprisonment
for nonpayment of
fine
66. The imprisonment which the Court imposes in default of payment of a
fine may be of any description to which the offender might have been
sentenced for the offence.
Imprisonment
for nonpayment of
fine, when
offence
punishable
with fine
only
67. If the offence be punishable with fine only, the imprisonment which the
Court imposes in default of payment of the fine shall be simple, and the term
for which the Court directs the offender to be imprisoned, in default of
payment of fine, shall not exceed the following scale, that is to say, for any
term not exceeding two months when the amount of the fine shall not
exceed fifty taka, and for any term not exceeding four months when the
amount shall not exceed one hundred taka, and for any term not exceeding
six months in any other case.
Imprisonment
to terminate
on payment
of fine
68. The imprisonment which is imposed in default of payment of a fine shall
terminate whenever that fine is either paid or levied by process of law.
Termination
of
imprisonment
on payment
of proportional part
of fine
69. If, before the expiration of the term of imprisonment fixed in default of
payment, such a proportion of the fine be paid or levied that the term of
imprisonment suffered in default of payment is not less than proportional to
the part of the fine still unpaid, the imprisonment shall terminate.
Illustration
A is sentenced to a fine of one hundred taka and four months imprisonment
in default of payment. Here, if seventy-five taka of the fine be paid or levied
before the expiration of one month of the imprisonment, A will be discharged
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 14/47
as soon as the first month has expired. If seventy-five taka be paid or levied
at the time of the expiration of the first month, or at any later time while A
continues in imprisonment, A will be immediately discharged. If fifty taka of
the fine be paid or levied before the expiration of the two months of the
imprisonments, A will be discharged as soon as the two months are
completed. If fifty taka be paid or levied at the time the expiration of those
two months, or at any later time while A continues in imprisonment, A will be
immediately discharged.
Fine
leviable
within six
years, or
during
imprisonment
Death not to
discharge
property
from liability
70. The fine, or any part thereof which remains unpaid, may be levied at any
time within six years after the passing of the sentence, and if, under the
sentence, the offender be liable to imprisonment for a longer period than six
years, then at any time previous to the expiration of that period; and the
death of the offender does not discharge from the liability of any property
which would, after his death, be legally liable for his debts.
Limit of
punishment
of offence
made up of
several
offences
71. Where anything which is an offence is made up of parts, any of which
parts is itself an offence, the offender shall not be punished with the
punishment of more than one of such his offences, unless it be so expressly
provided.
Where anything is an offence falling within two or more separate definitions
of any law in force for the time being by which offences are defined or
punished, or
Where several acts, of which one or more than one would by itself or
themselves constitute an offence, constitute, when combined, a different
offence,
the offender shall not be punished with a more severe punishment than the
Court which tries him could award for any one of such offences.
Illustrations
(a) A gives Z fifty strokes with a stick. Here A may have committed the
offence of voluntarily causing hurt to Z by the whole beating, and also by
each of the blows which make up the whole beating. If A were liable to
punishment for every blow, he might be imprisoned for fifty years, one for
each blow. But he is liable only to one punishment for the whole beating.
(b) But if, while A is beating Z, Y interferes, and A intentionally strikes Y,
here, as the blow given to Y is no part of the act whereby A voluntarily
causes hurt to Z, A is liable to one punishment for voluntarily causing hurt to
Z, and to another for the blow given to Y.
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 15/47
Punishment
of person
guilty of one
of several
offences,
the
judgment
stating that
it is
doubtful of
which
72. In all cases in which judgment is given that a person is guilty of one of
several offences specified in the judgment, but that it is doubtful of which
these offences he is guilty, the offender shall be punished for the offence for
which the lowest punishment is provided if the same punishment is not
provided for all.
Solitary
confinement
73. Whenever any person is convicted of an offence for which under this
Code the Court has power to sentence him to rigorous imprisonment, the
Court may, by its sentence, order that the offender shall be kept in solitary
confinement for any portion or portions of the imprisonment to which he is
sentenced, not exceeding three months in the whole, according to the
following scale, that is to say
a time not exceeding one month if the term of imprison-ment shall not
exceed six months:
a time not exceeding two months if the term of imprisonment shall exceed
six months and shall not exceed one year:
a time not exceeding three months if the term of imprisonment shall exceed
one year.
Limit of
solitary
confinement
74. In executing a sentence of solitary confinement, such confinement shall
in no case exceed fourteen days at a time, with intervals between the
periods of solitary confinement of not less duration than such periods, and
when the imprisonment awarded shall exceed three months, the solitary
confinement shall not exceed seven days in any one month of the whole
imprisonment awarded, with intervals between the periods of solitary
confinement of not less duration than such periods.
Enhanced
punishment
for certain
offences
under
Chapter XII
or Chapter
XVII after
previous
conviction
75. Whoever, having been convicted,
(a) by a Court in Bangladesh of an offence punishable under Chapter XII or
Chapter XVII of this Code with imprisonment of either description for a term
of three years or upwards; [* * *]
(b) [Omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws
(Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).]
shall be guilty of any offence punishable under either of those Chapters with
like imprisonment for the like term, shall be
26
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 16/47
অধায় এর নাম IV
GENERAL EXCEPTIONS
subject for every such subsequent offence to [imprisonment] for life, or to
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years.
27
Act done by
a person
bound, or
by mistake
of fact
believing
himself
bound, by
law
76. Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is, or who by
reason of a mistake of fact and not by reason of a mistake of law in good
faith believes himself to be, bound by law to do it.
Illustrations
(a) A, a soldier, fires on a mob by the order of his superior officer, in
conformity with the commands of the law. A has committed no offence.
(b) A, an officer of a Court of Justice, being ordered by that Court to arrest Y,
and, after due enquiry, believing Z to be Y, arrests Z. A has committed no
offence.
Act of judge
when acting
judicially
77. Nothing is an offence which is done by a Judge when acting judicially in
the exercise of any power which is, or which in good faith he believes to be,
given to him by law.
Act done
pursuant to
the
judgment or
order of
Court
78. Nothing which is done in pursuance of, or which is warranted by the
judgment or order of, a Court of Justice, if done whilst such judgment or
order remains in force, is an offence, notwithstanding the Court may have
had no jurisdiction to pass such judgment or order, provided the person
doing the act in good faith believes that the Court had such jurisdiction.
Act done by
a person
justified, or
by mistake
of fact
believing
himself
justified, by
law
79. Nothing is an offence which is done by any person who is justified by
law, or who by reason of a mistake of fact and not by reason of a mistake of
law in good faith, believes himself to be justified by law, in doing it.
Illustration
A sees Z commit what appears to A to be a murder. A, in the exercise, to the
best of his judgment, exerted in good faith of the power which the law gives
to all persons of apprehending murderers in the act, seizes Z, in order to
bring Z before the proper authorities. A has committed no offence, though it
may turn out that Z was acting in self-defence.
Accident in
doing a
lawful act
80. Nothing is an offence which is done by accident or misfortune, and
without any criminal intention or knowledge in the doing of a lawful act in a
lawful manner by lawful means and with proper care and caution.
Illustration
A is at work with a hatchet; the head flies off and kills a man who is standing
by. Here if there was no want of proper caution on the part of A, his act is
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 17/47
excusable and not an offence.
Act likely to
cause harm,
but done
without
criminal
intent and
to prevent
other harm
81. Nothing is an offence merely by reason of its being done with the
knowledge that it is likely to cause harm, if it be done without any criminal
intention to cause harm, and in good faith for the purpose of preventing or
avoiding other harm to person or property.
Explanation.-It is a question of fact in such a case whether the harm to be
prevented or avoided was of such a nature and so imminent as to justify or
excuse the risk of doing the act with the knowledge that it was likely to
cause harm.
Illustrations
(a) A, the captain of a steam vessel, suddenly and without any fault or
negligence on his part, finds himself in such a position that, before he can
stop his vessel, he must inevitably run down a boat B, with twenty or thirty
passengers on board, unless he changes the course of his vessel, and that,
by changing his course, he must incur risk of running down a boat C with
only two passengers on board, which he may possibly clear. Here, if A alters
his course without any intention to run down the boat C and in good faith for
the purpose of avoiding the danger to the passengers in the boat B, he is
not guilty of an offence, though he may run down the boat C by doing an act
which he knew was likely to cause that effect, if it be found as a matter of
fact that the danger which he intended to avoid was such as to excuse him
in incurring the risk of running down C.
(b) A, is in a great fire, pulls down houses in order to prevent the
conflagration from spreading. He does this with intention in good faith
of saving human life or property. Here if it be found that the harm to be
prevented was of such a nature and so imminent as to excuse A's act, A is
not guilty of the offence.
Act of a
child under
nine years
of age
82. Nothing is an offence which is done by a child under [nine] years of
age.
28
Act of a
child above
nine and
under
twelve of
immature
understanding
83. Nothing is an offence which is done by a child above [nine] years of
age and under twelve, who has not attained sufficient maturity of
understanding to judge of the nature and consequences of his conduct on
that occasion.
29
Act of a
person of
84. Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who, at the time of
doing it, by reason of unsoundness of mind, is incapable of knowing the
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 18/47
unsound
mind
nature of the act, or that he is doing what is either wrong or contrary to law.
Act of a
person
incapable of
judgment by
reason of
intoxication
caused
against his
will
85. Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who, at the time of
doing it, is, by reason of intoxication, incapable of knowing the nature of the
act, or that he is doing what is either wrong, or contrary to law: provided that
the thing which intoxicated him was administered to him without his
knowledge or against his will.
Offence
requiring a
particular
intent or
knowledge
committed
by one who
is
intoxicated
86. In cases where an act done is not an offence unless done with a
particular knowledge or intent, a person who does the act in a state of
intoxication shall be liable to be dealt with as if he had the same knowledge
as he would have had if he had not been intoxicated, unless the thing which
intoxicated him was administered to him without his knowledge or against
his will.
87. Act not
intended
and not
known to be
likely to
cause death
or grievous
hurt, done
by consent
87. Nothing which is not intended to cause death, or grievous hurt, and
which is not known by the doer to be likely to cause death, or grievous hurt,
is an offence by reason of any harm which it may cause, or be intended by
the doer to cause, to any person, above eighteen years of age, who has
given consent, whether express or implied, to suffer that harm; or by reason
of any harm which it may be known by the doer to be likely to cause to any
such person who has consented to take the risk of that harm.
Illustration
A and Z agree to fence with each other for amusement. This agreement
implies the consent of each to suffer any harm which in the course of such
fencing, may be caused without foul play; and if A, while playing fairly, hurts
Z, A commits no offence.
88. Act not
intended to
cause
death, done
by consent
in good
faith for
88. Nothing, which is not intended to cause death, is an offence by reason of
any harm which it may cause, or be intended by the doer to cause, or be
known by the doer to be likely to cause, to any person for whose benefit it is
done in good faith, and who has given a consent, whether express or
implied, to suffer that harm, or to take the risk of that harm.
Illustration
A, a surgeon, knowing that a particular operation is likely to cause the death
of Z, who suffers under the painful complaint, but not intending to cause Z's
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 19/47
person’s
benefit
death, and intending, in good faith Z's benefit, performs that operation on Z,
with Z's consent. A has committed no offence.
Act done in
good faith
for benefit
of child or
insane
person, by
or by
consent of
guardian
89. Nothing which is done in good faith for the benefit of a person under
twelve years of age, or of unsound mind, by or by consent, either express or
implied, of the guardian or other person having lawful charge of that person,
is an offence by reason of any harm which it may cause, or be intended by
the doer to cause or be known by the doer to be likely to cause to that
person:
ProvidedFirstly.-That this exception shall not extend to the intentional causing of
death, or to the attempting to cause death;
Secondly.-That this exception shall not extend to the doing of anything which
the person doing it knows to be likely to cause death, for any purpose other
than the preventing of death or grievous hurt; or the curing of any grievous
disease or infirmity;
Thirdly.-That this exception shall not extent to the voluntary causing of
grievous hurt, or to the attempting to cause grievous hurt, unless it be for the
purpose of preventing death or grievous hurt, or the curing of any grievous
disease or infirmity;
Fourthly.-That this exception shall not extend to the abetment of any offence,
to the committing of which offence it would not extend.
Illustration
A, in good faith, for his child's benefit without his child's consent, has his
child cut for the stone by a surgeon, knowing it to be likely that the operation
will cause the child's death, but not intending to cause the child's death. A is
within the exception, inasmuch as his object was the cure of the child.
Consent
known to be
given under
fear or
misconception
90. A consent is not such a consent as is intended by any section of this
Code, if the consent is given by a person under fear of injury, or under a
misconception of fact, and if the person doing the act knows, or has reason
to believe, that the consent was given in consequence of such fear or
misconception; or
Consent of
insane
person
If the consent is given by a person who, from unsoundness of mind, or
intoxication, is unable to understand the nature and consequence of that to
which he gives his consent; or
Consent of
child
Unless the contrary appears from the context, if the consent is given by a
person who is under twelve years of age.
Exclusion of
acts which
91. The exceptions in sections 87, 88 and 89 do not extend to acts which
are offences independently of any harm which they may cause, or be
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 20/47
are offences
independently
of harm
caused
intended to cause, or be known to be likely to cause, to the person giving
the consent, or on whose behalf the consent is given.
Illustration
Causing miscarriage (unless caused in good faith for the purpose of saving
the life of woman) is an offence independently of any harm which it may
cause or be intended to cause to the woman. Therefore, it is not an offence
“by reason of such harm”; and the consent of the woman or of her guardian
to the causing of such miscarriage does not justify the act.
Act done in
good faith
for benefit
of a person
without
consent
92. Nothing is an offence by reason of any harm which it may cause to a
person for whose benefit it is done in good faith, even without that person's
consent, if the circumstances are such that it is impossible for that person to
signify consent, or if that person is incapable of giving consent, and has no
guardian or other person in lawful charge of him from whom it is possible to
obtain consent in time for the thing to be done with benefit:
ProvidedFirstly.-That this exception shall not extend to the intentional causing of
death, or the attempting to cause death;
Secondly.-That this exception shall not extend to the doing of anything which
the person doing it knows to be likely to cause death, for any purpose other
than the preventing of death or grievous hurt, or the curing of any grievous
disease or infirmity;
Thirdly.-That this exception shall not extend to the voluntary causing of hurt,
or to the attempting to cause hurt, for any purpose other than the preventing
of death or hurt;
Fourthly.-That this exception shall not extend to the abetment of any offence,
to the committing of which offence it would not extend.
Illustrations
(a) Z is thrown from his horse, and is insensible. A, a surgeon, finds that Z
requires to be trepanned. A not intending Z's death but in good faith for Z's
benefit, performs the trepan before Z recovers his power of judging for
himself. A has committed no offence.
(b) Z is carried off by a tiger. A fires at the tiger knowing it to be likely that the
shot may kill Z, but not intending to kill Z, and in good faith intending Z's
benefit. A's ball gives Z a mortal wound. A has committed no offence.
(c) A, a surgeon, sees a child suffer an accident which is likely to prove fatal
unless an operation be immediately performed. There is no time to apply to
the child's guardian. A performs the operation inspite of the entreaties of the
child, intending, in good faith, the child's benefit. A has committed no
offence.
(d) A is in a house which is on fire, with Z, a child. People below hold out a
blanket. A drops the child from the housetop, knowing it to be likely that the
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 21/47
Of the Right of the Private Defence
fall may kill the child, but not intending to kill the child, and intending, in good
faith, the child's benefit. Here even if the child is killed by the fall, A has
committed no offence.
Explanation.-Mere pecuniary benefit is not benefit within the meaning of
sections 88, 89 and 92.
Communication
made in
good faith
93. No communication made in good faith is an offence by reason of any
harm to the person to whom it is made, if it is made for the benefit of that
person.
Illustration
A, a surgeon, in good faith, communicates to a patient his opinion that he
cannot live. The patient dies in consequence of the shock. A has committed
no offence, though he knew it to be likely that the communication might
cause the patient's death.
Act to which
a person is
compelled
by threats
94. Except murder, and offences against the State punishable with death,
nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is compelled to do it by
threats, which, at the time of doing it, reasonably cause the apprehension
that instant death to that person will otherwise be the consequence:
Provided the person doing the act did not of his own accord, or from a
reasonable apprehension of harm to himself short of instant death, place
himself in the situation by which he became subject to such constraint.
Explanation 1.-A person who, of his own accord, or by reason of a threat of
being beaten, joins a gang of dacoits, knowing their character, is not entitled
to the benefit of this exception on the ground of his having been compelled
by his associates to do anything that is an offence by law.
Explanation 2.-A person seized by a gang of dacoits, and forced by threat of
instant death, to do a thing which is an offence by law; for example, a smith
compelled to take his tools and to force the door of a house for the dacoits
to enter and plunder it, is entitled to the benefit of this exception.
Act causing
slight harm
95. Nothing is an offence by reason that it causes, or that it is intended to
cause, or that it is known to be likely to cause, any harm, if that harm, is so
slight that no person of ordinary sense and temper would complain of such
harm.
Things done
in private
defence
96. Nothing is an offence which is done in the exercise of the right of private
defence.
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 22/47
Right of
private
defence of
the body
and of
property
97. Every person has a right, subject to the restrictions contained in section
99, to defend
Firstly.-His own body, and the body of any other person against any offence
affecting the human body;
Secondly.-The property, whether moveable or immovable, of himself or of
any other person, against any act which is an offence falling under the
definition of theft, robbery, mischief or criminal trespass, or which is an
attempt to commit theft, robbery, mischief or criminal trespass.
Right of
private
defence
against the
act of a
person of
unsound
mind, etc.
98. When an act, which would otherwise be a certain offence is not that
offence, by reason of the youth, the want of maturity of understanding, the
unsoundness of mind or the intoxication of the person doing that act, or by
reason of any misconception on the part of that person, every person has
the same right of private defence against that act which he would have if the
act were that offence.
Illustrations
(a) Z, under the influence of madness, attempts to kill A; Z is guilty of no
offence. But A has the same right of private defence which he would have if
Z were sane.
(b) A enters by night a house which he is legally entitled to enter. Z, in good
faith, taking A for a house-breaker, attacks A. Here Z, by attacking A under
this misconception, commits no offence. But A has the same right of private
defence against Z, which he would have if Z were not acting under that
misconception.
Acts against
which there
is no right
private
defence
99. There is no right of private defence against an act which does not
reasonably cause the apprehension of death or of grievous hurt, if done, or
attempted to be done by a public servant acting in good faith under colour of
his office, though that act may not be strictly justifiable by law.
There is no right of private defence against an act which does not
reasonably cause the apprehension of death or of grievous hurt, if done, or
attempted to be done, by the direction of a public servant acting in good faith
under colour of his office, though that act may not be strictly justifiable by
law.
There is no right of private defence in cases in which there is time to have
recourse to the protection of the public authorities.
Extent to
which the
right may be
exercised
The right of private defence in no case extends to the inflicting of more harm
than it is necessary to inflict for the purpose of defence.
Explanation 1.-A person is not deprived of the right of private defence
against an act done, or attempted to be done, by a public servant, as such
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 23/47
unless he knows, or has reason to believe, that the person doing the act is
such public servant.
Explanation 2.-A person is not deprived of the right of private defence
against an act done, or attempted to be done, by the direction of a public
servant, unless he knows, or has reason to believe, that the person doing
the act is acting by such direction, or unless such person states the authority
under which he acts, or if he has authority in writing, unless he produces
such authority, if demanded.
When the
right of
private
defence of
the body
extends to
causing
death
100. The right of private defence of the body extends, under the restrictions
mentioned in the last preceding section, to the voluntary causing of death or
of any other harm to the assailant, if the offence which occasions the
exercise of the right be of any of the descriptions hereinafter enumerated,
namely:-
Firstly.-Such an assault as may reasonably cause the apprehension that
death will otherwise be the consequence of such assault;
Secondly.-Such an assault as may reasonably cause the apprehension that
grievous hurt will otherwise be the consequence of such assault;
Thirdly.-An assault with the intention of committing rape;
Fourthly.-An assault with the intention of gratifying unnatural lust;
Fifthly.-An assault with the intention of kidnapping or abducting;
Sixthly.-An assault with the intention of wrongfully confining a person, under
circumstances which may reasonably cause him to apprehend that he will
be unable to have recourse to the public authorities for his release.
When such
right
extends to
causing any
harm other
than death
101. If the offence be not of any of the descriptions enumerated in the last
preceding section, the right of private defence of the body does not extend
to the voluntary causing of death to the assailant, but does extend, under
the restrictions mentioned in section 99 to the voluntary causing to the
assailant of any harm other than death.
Commencement
and
continuance
of the right
of private
defence of
the body
102. The right of private defence of the body commences as soon as a
reasonable apprehension of danger to the body arises from an attempt or
threat to commit the offence though the offence may not have been
committed; and it continues as long as such, apprehension of danger to the
body continues.
When the
right of
private
103. The right of private defence of property extends, under the restrictions
mentioned in section 99, to the voluntary causing of death or of any other
harm to the wrong-doer, if the offence, the committing of which, or the
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 24/47
defence of
property
extends to
causing
death
attempting to commit which, occasions the exercise of the right, be an
offence of any of the descriptions hereinafter enumerated, namely:-
Firstly.-Robbery;
Secondly.-House-breaking by night;
Thirdly.-Mischief by fire committed on any building, tent or vessel, which
building, tent or vessel is used as a human dwelling or as a place for the
custody of property;
Fourthly.-Theft, mischief or house-trespass, under such circumstances as
may reasonably cause apprehension that death or grievous hurt will be the
consequence, if such right of private defence is not exercised;
When such
right
extends to
causing any
harm other
than death
104. If the offence, the committing of which, or the attempting to commit
which, occasions the exercise of the right of private defence, be theft,
mischief, or criminal trespass, not of any of the descriptions enumerated in
the last preceding section, that right does not extend to the voluntary
causing of death, but does extend, subject to the restrictions mentioned in
section 99, to the voluntary causing to the wrong-doer of any harm other
than death.
Commencement
and
continuance
of the right
of private
defence of
property
105. The right of private defence of property commences when a reasonable
apprehension of danger to the property commences.
The right of private defence of property against theft continues till the
offender has effected his retreat with the property or either the assistance of
the public authorities is obtained, or the property has been recovered.
The right of private defence of property against robbery continues as long as
the offender causes or attempts to cause to any person death or hurt or
wrongful restraint or as long as the fear of instant death or of instant hurt or
of instant personal restraint continues.
The right of private defence of property against criminal trespass or mischief
continues as long as the offender continues in the commission of criminal
trespass or mischief.
The right of private defence of property against house-breaking by night
continues as long as the house-trespass which has been begun by such
house-breaking continues.
Right of
private
defence
against
deadly
assault
when there
is risk of
106. If in the exercise of the right of private defence against an assault
which reasonably causes the apprehension of death, the defender be so
situated that he cannot effectually exercise that right without risk of harm to
an innocent person, his right of private defence extends to the running of
that risk.
Illustration
A is attacked by a mob who attempt to murder him. He cannot effectually
exercise his right of private defence without firing on the mob, and he cannot
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 25/47
অধায় এর নাম V
OF ABETMENT
harm to
innocent
person
fire without risk of harming young children who are mingled with the mob. A
commits no offence if by so firing he harms any of the children.
Abetment of
a thing
107. A person abets the doing of a thing, who
Firstly.-Instigates any person to do that thing; or
Secondly.-Engages with one or more other person or persons in any
conspiracy for the doing of that thing, if an act or illegal omission takes place
in pursuance of that conspiracy, and in order to the doing of that thing; or
Thirdly.-Intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission, the doing of that
thing.
Explanation 1.-A person who, by wilful misrepresenta-tion, or by wilful
concealment of a material fact which he is bound to disclose, voluntarily
causes or procures, or attempts to cause or procure, a thing to be done, is
said to instigate the doing of that thing.
Illustration
A, a public officer, is authorized by a warrant from a Court of Justice to
apprehend Z. B, knowing that fact and also that C is not Z, wilfully
represents to A that C is Z, and thereby intentionally causes A to apprehend
C. Here B abets by instigation the apprehension of C.
Explanation 2.-Whoever, either prior to or at the time of the commission of
an act, does anything in order to facilitate the commission of that act, and
thereby facilitates the commission thereof, is said to aid the doing of that act.
Abettor 108. A person abets an offence, who abets either the commission of an
offence, or the commission of an act which would be an offence, if
committed by a person capable by law of committing an offence with the
same intention or knowledge as that of the abettor.
Explanation 1.-The abetment of the illegal omission of an act may amount to
an offence although the abettor may not himself be bound to do that act.
Explanation 2.-To constitute the offence of abetment it is not necessary that
the act abetted should be committed, or that the effect requisite to constitute
the offence should be caused.
Illustrations
(a) A instigates B to murder C. B refuses to do so. A is guilty of abetting B to
commit murder.
(b) A instigates B to murder D. B in pursuance of the instigation stabs D. D
recovers from the wound. A is guilty of instigating B to commit murder.
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 26/47
Explanation 3.-It is not necessary that the person abetted should be capable
by law of committing an offence, or that he should have the same guilty
intention or knowledge as that of the abettor, or any guilty intention or
knowledge.
Illustrations
(a) A, with a guilty intention, abets a child or a lunatic to commit an act which
would be an offence, if committed by a person capable by law of committing
an offence, and having the same intention as A. Here A, whether the act be
committed or not, is guilty of abetting an offence.
(b) A, with the intention of murdering Z, instigates B, a child under seven
years of age, to do an act which causes Z's death. B, in consequence of the
abetment, does the act in the absence of A and thereby, causes Z's death.
Here, though B was not capable by law of committing an offence, A is liable
to be punished in the same manner as if B had been capable by law of
committing an offence, and had committed murder, and he is therefore
subject to the punishment of death.
(c) A instigates B to set fire to a dwelling-house. B, in consequence of the
unsoundness of his mind, being incapable of knowing the nature of the act,
or that he is doing what is wrong or contrary to law, sets fire to the house in
consequence of A's instigation. B has committed no offence, but A is guilty
of abetting the offence of setting fire to a dwelling-house, and is liable to the
punishment provided for that offence.
(d) A intending to cause a theft to be committed, instigates B to take
property belonging to Z out of Z's possession. A induces B to believe that
the property belongs to A. B takes the property out of Z's possession, in
good faith, believing it to be A's property. B, acting under this misconception,
does not take dishonestly, and therefore does not commit theft. But A is
guilty of abetting theft, and is liable to the same punishment as if B had
committed theft.
Explanation 4.-The abetment of an offence being an offence, the abetment
of such an abetment is also an offence.
Illustration
A instigates B to instigate C to murder Z. B accordingly instigates C to
murder Z, and C commits that offence in consequence of B's instigation. B is
liable to be punished for his offence with the punishment for murder; and, as
A instigated B to commit the offence, A is also liable to the same
punishment.
Explanation 5.-It is not necessary to the commission of the offence of
abetment by conspiracy that the abettor should concert the offence with the
person who commits it. It is sufficient if he engages in the conspiracy in
pursuance of which the offence is committed.
Illustration
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 27/47
A concerts with B a plan for poisoning Z. It is agreed that A shall administer
the poison. B then explains the plan to C mentioning that a third person is to
administer the poison, but without mentioning A's name. C agrees to procure
the poison, and procures and delivers it to B for the purpose of its being
used in the manner explained. A administers the poison; Z dies in
consequence. Here, though A and C have not conspired together, yet C has
been engaged in the conspiracy in pursuance of which Z has been
murdered. C has therefore committed the offence defined in this section and
is liable to the punishment for murder.
Abetment in
Bangladesh,
of offences
outside it
[108A. A person abets an offence within the meaning of this Code who, in
Bangladesh, abets the commission of any act without and beyond
Bangladesh which would constitute an offence committed in Bangladesh.]
Abetment in Bangladesh of offences outside it
Illustration
A, in Bangladesh, instigates B, a foreigner in Goa, to commit a murder in
Goa. A is guilty of abetting murder.
30
Punishment
of abetment
if the act
abetted is
committed
in
consequence
and where
no express
provision is
made for its
punishment.
109. Whoever abets any offence shall, if the act abetted is committed in
consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this
Code for the punishment of such abetment, be punished with the
punishment provided for the offence. Punishment of abetment if the act
abetted is committed in consequence and where no express provision is
made for its punishment
Explanation.-An act or offence is said to be committed in consequence of
abetment, when it is committed in consequence of the instigation, or in
pursuance of the conspiracy, or with the aid which constitutes the abetment.
Illustrations
(a) A offers a bribe to B, a public servant, as a reward for showing A some
favour in the exercise of B's official functions. B accepts the bribe. A has
abetted the offence defined in section 161.
(b) A instigates B to give false evidence. B, in consequence of the instigation
commits that offence. A is guilty of abetting that offence, and is liable to the
same punishment as B.
(c) A and B conspire to poison Z. A, in pursuance of the conspiracy,
procures the poison and delivers it to B in order that he may administer it to
Z. B, in pursuance of the conspiracy, administers the poison to Z in A's
absence and thereby causes Z's death. Here B is guilty of murder. A is guilty
of abetting that offence by conspiracy, and is liable to the punishment for
murder.
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 28/47
Punishment
of abetment
if person
abetted
does act
with
different
intention
from that of
abettor
Punishment of abetment if person abetted does act with different intention
from that of abettor 110. Whoever abets the commission of an offence shall,
if the person abetted does the act with a different intention or knowledge
from that of the abettor, be punished with the punishment provided for the
offence which would have been committed if the act had been done with the
intention or knowledge of the abettor and with no other.
Liability of
abettor
when one
act abetted
and
different act
done
Liability of abettor when one act abetted and different act done 111. When
an act is abetted and a different act is done, the abettor is liable for the act
done, in the same manner and to the same extent as if he had directly
abetted it:
Provided the act done was a probable consequence of the abetment, and
was committed under the influence of the instigation, or with the aid or in
pursuance of the conspiracy which constituted the abetment.
Illustrations
(a) A instigates a child to put poison into the food of Z, and gives him poison
for that purpose. The child, in consequence of the instigation, by mistake
puts the poison into the food of Y, which is by the side of that of Z. Here if
the child was acting under the influence of A's instigation, and the act done
was under the circumstances a probable consequence of the abetment, A is
liable in the same manner and to the same extent as if he had instigated the
child to put the poison into the food of Y.
(b) A instigates B to burn Z's house. B sets fire to the house and at the same
time commits theft of property there. A, though guilty of abetting the burning
of the house, is not guilty of abetting the theft; for the theft was a distinct act,
and not a probable consequence of the burning.
(c) A instigates B and C to break into an inhabited house at midnight for the
purpose of robbery, and provides them with arms for that purpose. B and C
break into the house, and being resisted by Z, one of the inmates, murder Z.
Here, if that murder was the probable consequence of the abetment, A is
liable to the punishment provided for murder.
Abettor
when liable
to
cumulative
punishment
for act
112. If the act for which the abettor is liable under the last preceding section
is committed in addition to the act abetted, and constitutes a distinct offence,
the abettor is liable to punishment for each of the offences.
Illustration
A instigates B to resist by force a distress made by a public servant. B, in
consequence, resists that distress. In offering the resistance, B voluntarily
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 29/47
abetted and
for act done
causes grievous hurt to the officer executing the distress. As B has
committed both the offence of resisting the distress, and the offence of
voluntarily causing grievous hurt, B is liable to punishment for both these
offences; and, if A knew that B was likely voluntarily to cause grievous hurt
in resisting the distress, A will also be liable to punishment for each of the
offences.
Liability of
abettor for
an effect
caused by
the act
abetted
different
from that
intended by
the abettor
113. When an act is abetted with the intention on the part of the abettor of
causing a particular effect, and an act for which the abettor is liable in
consequence of the abetment, causes a different effect from that intended
by the abettor, the abettor is liable for the effect caused, in the same manner
and to the same extent as if he had abetted the act with the intention of
causing that effect, provided he knew that the act abetted was likely to
cause that effect.
Illustration
A instigates B to cause grievous hurt to Z. B, in consequence of the
instigation, causes grievous hurt to Z. Z dies in consequence. Here, if A
knew that the grievous hurt abetted was likely to cause death, A is liable to
be punished with the punishment provided for murder.
Abettor
present
when
offence is
committed
114. Whenever any person, who if absent would be liable to be punished as
an abettor, is present when the act or offence for which he would be
punishable in consequence of the abetment is committed, he shall be
deemed to have committed such act or offence.
Abetment of
offence
punishable
with death
or
imprisonment
for life- if
offence be
not
committed;
if act
causing
harm be
done in
consequence
115. Whoever abets the commission of an offence punishable with death or
[imprisonment] for life, shall, if that offence be not committed in
consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this
Code for the punishment of such abetment, be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall
also be liable to fine;
and if any act for which the abettor is liable in consequence of the abetment,
and which causes hurt to any person, is done, the abettor shall be liable to
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to fourteen
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Illustration
A instigates B to murder Z. The offence is not committed. If B had murdered
Z, he would have been subject to the punishment of death or
[imprisonment] for life. Therefore A is liable to imprisonment for a term
which may extend to seven years and also to a fine; and, if any hurt be done
to Z in consequence of the abetment, he will be liable to imprisonment for a
term which may extend to fourteen years, and to fine.
31
32
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 30/47
Abetment of
offence
punishable
with
imprisonmentif offence be
not
committed;
if abettor or
person
abetted be a
public
servant
whose duty
it is to
prevent
offence
116. Whoever abets an offence punishable with imprisonment shall, if that
offence be not committed in consequence of the abetment, and no express
provision is made by this Code for the punishment of such abetment, be
punished with imprisonment of any description provided for that offence for a
term which may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term provided for
that offence; or with such fine as is provided for that offence, or with both;
and if the abettor or the person abetted is a public servant, whose duty it is
to prevent the commission of such offence, the abettor shall be punished
with imprisonment of any description provided for that offence, for a term
which may extend to one-half of the longest term provided for that offence,
or with such fine as is provided for the offence, or with both.
Illustrations
(a) A offers a bribe to B, a public servant, as a reward for showing A some
favour in the exercise of B's official functions. B refuses to accept the bribe.
A is punishable under this section.
(b) A instigates B to give false evidence. Here, if B does not give false
evidence, A has nevertheless committed the offence defined in this section,
and is punishable accordingly.
(c) A, a police-officer, whose duty it is to prevent robbery, abets the
commission of robbery. Here, though the robbery be not committed, A is
liable to one-half of the longest term of imprisonment provided for that
offence, and also to fine.
(d) B abets the commission of a robbery by A, a police-officer, whose duty it
is to prevent that offence. Here though the robbery be not committed, B is
liable to one-half of the longest term of imprisonment provided for the
offence of robbery, and also to fine.
Abetting
commission
of offence
by the
public, or by
more than
ten persons
117. Whoever abets the commission of an offence by the public generally or
by any number or class of persons exceeding ten, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three
years, or with fine, or with both.
Illustration
A affixes in a public place a placard instigating a sect consisting of more
than ten members to meet at a certain time and place, for the purpose of
attacking the members of an adverse sect, while engaged in a procession. A
has committed the offence defined in this section.
Concealing
design to
commit
offence
punishable
118. Whoever intending to facilitate or knowing it to be likely that he will
thereby facilitate the commission of an offence punishable with death or
[imprisonment] for life,
voluntarily conceals, by any act or illegal omission, the existence of a design
to commit such offence or makes any representation which he knows to be
33
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 31/47
with death
or
imprisonment
for life- if
offence be
committed;
if offence be
not
committed
false respecting such design,
shall, if that offence be committed, be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, or, if the offence be
not committed, with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years; and in either case shall also be liable to fine.
Illustration
A, knowing that dacoity is about to be committed at B, falsely informs the
Magistrate that a dacoity is about to be committed at C, a place in an
opposite direction, and thereby misleads the Magistrate with intent to
facilitate the commission of the offence. The dacoity is committed at B in
pursuance of the design. A is punishable under this section.
Public
servant
concealing
design to
commit
offence
which it is
his duty to
prevent119. Whoever, being a public servant intending to facilitate or knowing it to
be likely that he will thereby facilitate the commission of an offence which it
is his duty as such public servant to prevent,
voluntarily conceals, by any act or illegal omission, the existence of a design
to commit such offence, or makes any representation which he knows to be
false respecting such design,
if offence be
committed;
shall, if the offence be committed, be punished with imprisonment of any
description provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to one-half
of the longest term of such imprisonment, or with such fine as is provided for
that offence, or with both;
if offence be
punishable
with death,
etc;
or, if the offence be punishable with death or [imprisonment] for life, with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years;
34
if offence be
not
committed
or, if the offence be not committed, shall be punished with imprisonment of
any description provided for the offence for a term which may extend to onefourth part of the longest term of such imprisonment or with such fine as is
provided for the offence, or with both.
Illustration
A, an officer of police, being legally bound to give information of all designs
to commit robbery which may come to his knowledge, and knowing that B
designs to commit robbery, omits to give such information, with intent to
facilitate the commission of that offence. Here A has by an illegal omission
concealed the existence of B's design, and is liable to punishment according
to the provision of this section.
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 32/47
অধায় এর নাম VA
CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY
অধায় এর নাম VI
OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE STATE
Concealing
design to
commit
offence
punishable
with
imprisonment
120. Whoever, intending to facilitate or knowing it to be likely that he will
thereby facilitate the commission of an offence punishable with
imprisonment,
voluntarily conceals, by any act or illegal omission, the existence of a design
to commit such offence, or makes any representation which he knows to be
false respecting such design,
if offence be
committed;
if offence be
not
committed
shall, if the offence be committed, be punished with imprisonment of the
description provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to onefourth, and, if the offence be not committed, to one-eighth, of the longest
term of such imprisonment, or with such fine as is provided for the offence,
or with both.
35
Definition of
criminal
conspiracy.
120A. When two or more persons agree to do, or cause to be done,-
(1) an illegal act, or
(2) an act which is not illegal by illegal means, such an agreement is
designated a criminal conspiracy:
Provided that no agreement except an agreement to commit an offence
shall amount to a criminal conspiracy unless some act besides the
agreement is done by one or more parties to such agreement in pursuance
thereof.
Explanation.-It is immaterial whether the illegal act is the ultimate object of
such agreement, or is merely incidental to that object.
Punishment
of criminal
conspiracy
120B. (1) Whoever is a party to a criminal conspiracy to commit an offence
punishable with death, [imprisonment for life] or rigorous imprisonment for
a term of two years or upwards, shall, where no express provision is made
in this Code for the punishment of such a conspiracy, be punished in the
same manner as if he had abetted such offence.
(2) Whoever is a party to a criminal conspiracy other than a criminal
conspiracy to commit an offence punishable as aforesaid shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term not exceeding six months,
or with fine or with both.]
36
Waging or
attempting
121. Whoever wages war against Bangladesh, or attempts to wage such
war, or abets the waging of such war, shall be punished with death, or
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 33/47
to wage war,
or abeting
waging of
war, against
Bangladesh
[imprisonment] for life, and shall also be liable to fine.Illustration
A joins an insurrection against Bangladesh. A has committed the offence
defined in this section.
37
Conspiracy
to commit
offences
punishable
by section
121.
[121A. Whoever within or without Bangladesh conspires to commit any of
the offences punishable by section 121, or to deprive Bangladesh of the
sovereignty of her territories or of any part thereof, or conspires to overawe,
by means of criminal force or the show of criminal force, the Government,
shall be punished with [imprisonment for life] or with imprisonment of either
description which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.]
Explanation.-To constitute a conspiracy under this section, it is not
necessary that any act or illegal omission shall take place in pursuance.
38
39
Collecting
arms, etc.,
with
intention of
waging war
against
Bangladesh
122. Whoever collects men, arms or ammunition or otherwise prepares to
wage war with the intention of either waging or being prepared to wage war
against Bangladesh, shall be punished with [imprisonment] for life or
imprisonment of either description for a term not exceeding ten years, and
shall also be liable to fine.
40
Concealing
with intent
to facilitate
design to
wage war
123. Whoever, by any act, or by any illegal omission, conceals the existence
of a design to wage war against Bangladesh, intending by such
concealment to facilitate, or knowing it to be likely that such concealment will
facilitate the waging of such war, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
Condemnation
of the
creation of
the State,
and
advocacy of
abolition of
its
sovereignty
[123A. (I) Whoever, with or without Bangladesh, with intent to influence, or
knowing it to be likely that he will influence, any person or the whole or any
section of the public, in a manner likely to be prejudicial to the safety of
Bangladesh, or to endanger the sovereignty of Bangladesh in respect of all
or any of the territories lying within its borders, shall by words, spoken or
written, or by signs or visible representation, condemn the creation of
Bangladesh [in pursuance of the Proclamation of Independence on the
twenty-sixth day of March, 1971], or advocate the curtailment or abolition of
the sovereignty of Bangladesh in respect of all or any of the territories lying
within its borders, whether by amalgamation with the territories of
neighboring States or otherwise, shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, when any person is proceeded against under this section, it shall be
41
42
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 34/47
lawful for any Court before which he may be produced in the course of the
investigation or trial, to make such order as it may think fit in respect of his
movements, of his association or communication with other persons, and of
his activities in regard to dissemination of news, propagation of opinions,
until such time as the case is finally decided.]
(3) Any Court which is a Court of appeal or of revision in relation to the Court
mentioned in sub-section (2) may also make an order under that subsection.]
Assaulting
President,
The
Government,
etc., with
intent to
compel or
restrain the
exercise of
any lawful
power
124. Whoever, with the intention of inducing or compelling the President of
Bangladesh, or [the Government], to exercise or refrain from exercising in
any manner any of the lawful powers of the President, or [the
Government],
assaults, or wrongfully restrains, or attempts wrongfully to restrain, or
overawes, by means of criminal force or the show of criminal force, or
attempts so to overawe, the President, [* * *],
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
43
44
45
Sedition [124A. Whoever by words, either spoken or written, or by signs, or by
visible representation, or otherwise, brings or attempts to bring into hatred or
contempt, or excites or attempts to excite disaffection towards, the
Government established by law shall be punished with [imprisonment for
life] or any shorter term, to which fine may be added, or with imprisonment
which may extend to three years, to which fine may be added, or with fine.]
Explanation 1.-The expression "disaffection" includes disloyalty and all
feelings of enmity.
Explanation 2.-Comments expressing disapprobation of the measures of the
Government with a view to obtain their alteration by lawful means, without
exciting or attempting to excite hatred, contempt or disaffection, do not
constitute an offence under this section.
Explanation 3.-Comments expressing disapprobation of the administrative or
other action of the Government without exciting or attempting to excite
hatred, contempt or disaffection, do not constitute an offence under this
section.
46
47
Waging war
against any
Asiatic
Power in
125. Whoever wages war against the Government of any Asiatic power in
alliance or at peace with Bangladesh or attempts to wage such war, or abets
the waging of such war, shall be punished with [imprisonment] for life, to
which fine may be added, or with imprisonment of either description for a
48
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 35/47
alliance with
Bangladesh
term which may extend to seven years, to which fine may be added, or with
fine.
Committing
depredation
on
territories of
Power at
peace with
Bangladesh
126. Whoever commits depredation, or makes preparations to commit
depredation, on the territories of any Power in alliance or at peace with
Bangladesh, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine and to
forfeiture of any property used or intended to be used in committing such
depredation, or acquired by such depredation.
Receiving
property
taken by
war or
depredation
mentioned
in sections
125 and 126
127. Whoever receives any property knowing the same to have been taken
in the commission of any of the offences mentioned in sections 125 and
126, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine and to
forfeiture of the property so received.
Public
servant
voluntarily
allowing
prisoner of
State or war
to escape
128. Whoever, being a public servant and having the custody of any State
prisoner or prisoner of war, voluntarily allows such prisoner to escape from
any place in which such prisoner is confined, shall be punished with
[imprisonment] for life, or imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
49
Public
servant
negligently
suffering
such
prisoner to
escape
129. Whoever, being a public servant and having the custody of any State
prisoner or prisoner of war, negligently suffers such prisoner to escape from
any place of confinement in
which such prisoner is confined, shall be punished with simple imprisonment
for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Aiding
escape of,
rescuing or
harbouring
such
prisoner
130. Whoever knowingly aids or assists any State prisoner or prisoner of
war in escaping from lawful custody, or rescues or attempts to rescue any
such prisoner, or harbours or conceals any such prisoner who has escaped
from lawful custody, or offers or attempts to offer any resistance to the
recapture of such prisoner shall be punished with [imprisonment] for life, or
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten
years and shall also be liable to fine.
50
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 36/47
অধায় এর নাম VII
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO THE ARMY, NAVY AND AIR FORCE
Explanation.-A State prisoner or prisoner of war, who is permitted to be at
large on his parole within certain limits in Bangladesh, is said to escape from
lawful custody if he goes beyond the limits within which he is allowed to be
at large.
Abetting
mutiny, or
attempting
to seduce a
soldier,
sailor or
airman from
his duty
131. Whoever abets the committing of mutiny by an officer, soldier, sailor or
airman, in the Army, Navy or Air Force of Bangladesh, or attempts to seduce
any such officer, soldier, sailor or airman from his allegiance or his duty, shall
be punished with [imprisonment] for life, or with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable
to fine.
Explanation.-In this section the words "officer", “soldier", "sailor" and
"airman" include any person subject to the [Army Act, 1952 or the Navy
Ordinance, 1961 or the Air Force Act, 1953], as the case may be.
51
52
Abetment of
mutiny, if
mutiny is
committed
in
consequence
thereof
132. Whoever abets the committing of mutiny by an officer, soldier, sailor or
airman, in the Army, Navy or Air Force of Bangladesh, shall, if mutiny be
committed in consequence of that abetment, be punished with death or with
[imprisonment] for life, or imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
53
Abetment of
assault by
soldier,
sailor or
airman on
his superior
officer,
when in
execution of
his office
133. Whoever, abets an assault by an officer, soldier, sailor or airman, in the
Army, Navy or Air Force of Bangladesh, on any superior officer being in the
execution of his office, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
Abetment of
such
assault, if
the assault
is
committed
134. Whoever, abets an assault by an officer, soldier sailor or airman, in the
Army, Navy or Air Force of Bangladesh, on any superior officer being in the
execution of his office, shall, if such assault be committed in consequence of
that abetment be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall be liable to fine.
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 37/47
Abetment of
desertion of
soldier,
sailor or
airman
135. Whoever abets the desertion of any officer, soldier, sailor or airman, in
the Army, Navy or Air Force of Bangladesh, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years,
or with fine, or with both.
Harbouring
deserter
136. Whoever, except as hereinafter excepted, knowing or having reason to
believe that an officer, soldier, sailor or airman, in the Army, Navy or Air
Force of Bangladesh, has deserted, harbours such officer, soldier, sailor or
airman, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Exception.-This provision does not extend to the case in which the harbour
is given by a wife to her husband.
Deserter
concealed
on board
merchant
vessel
through
negligence
of master
137. The master or person in charge of a merchant vessel, on board of
which any deserter from the Army, Navy or Air Force of Bangladesh is
concealed, shall, though ignorant of such concealment, be liable to a penalty
not exceeding five hundred taka if he might have known of such
concealment but for some neglect of his duty as such master or person in
charge, or but for some want of discipline on board of the vessel.
Abetment of
act of
insubordination
by soldier,
sailor or
airman
138. Whoever abets what he knows to be an act of insubordination by an
officer, soldier, sailor or airman, in the Army, Navy or Air Force of
Bangladesh, shall, if such act of insubordination be committed in
consequence of that abetment, be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with
both.
[Repealed] 138A. [Repealed by section 2 and Schedule of the Amending Act, 1934 (Act
No. XXXV of 1934).]
Persons
subject to
certain acts
139. No person subject to the [* * *] Army Act, 1952, the [Navy
Ordinance, 1961], the [* * *] Air Force Act, 1953, is subject to punishment
under this Code for any of the offences defined in this Chapter.
54 55
56
Wearing
garb or
carrying
token used
by soldier,
sailor or
airman
140. Whoever, not being a soldier, sailor or airman in the Military, Naval or
Air service of Bangladesh, wears any garb or carries any token resembling
any garb or token used by such a soldier, sailor or airman with the intention
that it may be believed that he is such a soldier, sailor or airman, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred taka
or with both.
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 38/47
অধায় এর নাম VIII
OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE PUBLIC TRANQUILITY
Unlawful
assembly
141. An assembly of five or more persons is designated an "unlawful
assembly," if the common object of the persons composing that assembly
is
First.-To overawe by criminal force, or show of criminal force, Government or
Legislature, or any public servant in the exercise of the lawful power of such
public servant; or
Second.-To resist the execution of any law, or of any legal process; or
Third.To commit any mischief or criminal trespass, or other offence; or
Fourth.-By means of criminal force, or show of criminal force, to any person
to take or obtain possession of any property, or to deprive any person of the
enjoyment of a right of way, or of the use of water or other incorporeal right
of which he is in possession or enjoyment, or to enforce any right or
supposed right; or
Fifth.-By means of criminal force, or show of criminal force, to compel any
person to do what he is not legally bound to do, or to omit to do what he is
legally entitled to do.
Explanation.-An assembly which was not unlawful when it assembled, may
subsequently become an unlawful assembly.
Being
member of
unlawful
assembly
142. Whoever, being aware of facts which render any assembly an unlawful
assembly, intentionally joins that assembly, or continues in it, is said to be a
member of an unlawful assembly.
Punishment 143. Whoever is a member of an unlawful assembly, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine, or with both.
Joining
unlawful
assembly,
armed with
deadly
weapon
144. Whoever, being armed with any deadly weapon, or with anything
which, used as a weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, is a member of
an unlawful assembly, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with
both.
Joining or
continuing
in unlawful
assembly,
145. Whoever joins or continues in an unlawful assembly, knowing that such
unlawful assembly has been commanded in the manner prescribed by law
to disperse, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 39/47
knowing it
has been
commanding
to disperse
Rioting 146. Whenever force or violence is used by an unlawful assembly, or by any
member thereof, in prosecution of the common object of such assembly,
every member of such assembly is guilty of the offence of rioting.
Punishment
for rioting
147. Whoever is guilty of rioting, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both.
Rioting,
armed with
deadly
weapon
148. Whoever is guilty of rioting, being armed with a deadly weapon or with
anything which, used as a weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
Every
member of
unlawful
assembly
guilty of
offence
committed
in
prosecution
of common
object
149. If an offence is committed by any member of an unlawful assembly in
prosecution of the common object of that assembly, or such as the members
of that assembly knew to be likely to be committed in prosecution of that
object, every person who, at the time of the committing of that offence, is a
member of the same assembly, is guilty of that offence.
Hiring, or
conniving at
hiring, of
persons to
join
unlawful
assembly
150. Whoever hires or engages, or employs, or promotes, or connives at the
hiring, engagement or employment of any person to join or become a
member of any unlawful assembly, shall be punishable as a member of such
unlawful assembly, and for any offence which may be committed by any
such person as a member of such unlawful assembly in pursuance of such
hiring, engagement or employment, in the same manner as if he had been a
member of such unlawful assembly, or himself had committed such offence.
Knowingly
joining or
continuing
in assembly
of five or
more
persons
151. Whoever knowingly joins or continues in any assembly of five or more
persons likely to cause a disturbance of the public peace, after such
assembly has been lawfully commanded to disperse, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine, or with both.
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 40/47
after it has
been
commanded
to disperse
Explanation.-If the assembly is an unlawful assembly within the meaning of
section 141, the offender will be punishable under section 145.
Assaulting
or
obstructing
public
servant
when
suppressing
riot, etc.
152. Whoever assaults or threatens to assault, or obstructs or attempts to
obstruct, any public servant in the discharge of his duty as such public
servant, in endeavouring to disperse an unlawful assembly, or to suppress a
riot or affray, or uses, or threatens, or attempts to use criminal force to such
public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to three years or with fine, or with both.
Wantonly
giving
provocation
with intent
to cause
riot- if
rioting be
committed;
if not
committed
153. Whoever malignantly, or wantonly, by doing anything which is illegal,
gives provocation to any person intending or knowing it to be likely that such
provocation will cause the offence of rioting to be committed, shall, if the
offence of rioting be committed in consequence of such provocation, be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both; and if the offence of rioting be
not committed, with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
Promoting
enmity
between
classes
[153A. Whoever by words, either spoken or written, or by signs, or by
visible representations, or otherwise, promotes or attempts to promote
feelings of enmity or hatred between different classes of the citizens of
Bangladesh, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to two
years, or with fine, or with both.]
Explanation.-It does not amount to an offence within the meaning of this
section to point out, without malicious intention and with an honest view to
their removal, matters which are producing or have a tendency to produce,
feelings of enmity or hatred between different classes of the citizens of
Bangladesh.
57
Inducing
students,
etc. to take
part in
political
activity
[153B. Whoever by words, either spoken or written, or by signs, or by
visible representations, or otherwise, induce or attempts to induce any
student, or any class of students, or any institution interested in or
connected with students, to take part in any political activity which disturbs
or undermines, or is likely to disturb or undermine, the public order shall be
punished with imprisonment which may extend to two years or with fine, or
with both.]
58
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 41/47
Owner or
occupier of
land on
which an
unlawful
assembly is
held
154. Whenever any unlawful assembly or riot takes place, the owner or
occupier of the land upon which such unlawful assembly is held, or such riot
is committed, and any person having or claiming an interest in such land,
shall be punishable with fine not exceeding one thousand taka, if he or his
agent or manager, knowing that such offence is being or has been
committed, or having reason to believe it is likely to be committed, do not
give the earliest notice thereof in his or their power to the principal officer at
the nearest police-station, and do not, in the case of his or their having
reason to believe that it was about to be committed, use all lawful means in
his or their power to prevent it and, in the event of its taking place, do not
use all lawful means in his or their power to disperse or suppress the riot or
unlawful assembly.
Liability of
person for
whose
benefit riot
is
committed
155. Whenever a riot is committed for the benefit or on behalf of any person
who is the owner or occupier of any land respecting which such riot takes
place or who claims any interest in such land, or in the subject of any
dispute which gave rise to the riot, or who has accepted or derived any
benefit therefrom, such person shall be punishable with fine, if he or his
agent or manager, having reason to believe that such riot was likely to be
committed or that the unlawful assembly by which such riot was committed
was likely to be held, shall not respectively use all lawful means in his or
their power to prevent such assembly or riot from taking place, and for
suppressing and dispersing the same.
Liability of
agent of
owner or
occupier for
whose
benefit riot
is
committed
156. Whenever a riot is committed for the benefit or on behalf of any person
who is the owner or occupier of any land respecting which such riot takes
place, or who claims any interest in such land, or in the subject of any
dispute which gave rise to the riot, or who has accepted or derived any
benefit therefrom,
the agent or manager of such person shall be punishable with fine, if such
agent or manager, having reason to believe that such riot was likely to be
committed, or that the unlawful assembly by which such riot was committed
was likely to be held, shall not use all lawful means in his power to prevent
such riot or assembly from taking place and for suppressing and dispersing
the same.
Harbouring
persons
hired for an
unlawful
assembly
157. Whoever harbours, receives or assembles, in any house or premises in
his occupation or charge, or under his control any persons, knowing that
such persons have been hired, engaged or employed, or are about to be
hired, engaged or employed, to join or become members of an unlawful
assembly, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 42/47
অধায় এর নাম IX
OF OFFENCES BY OR RELATING TO PUBLIC SERVANTS
Being hired
to take part
in an
unlawful
assembly or
riot; or to go
armed
158. Whoever is engaged or hired, or offers or attempts to be hired or
engaged, to do or assist in doing any of the acts specified in section 141,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
and whoever, being so engaged or hired as aforesaid, goes armed, or
engages or offers to go armed, with any deadly weapon or with anything
which used as a weapon of offence is likely to cause death, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Affray 159. When two or more persons, by fighting in a public place, disturb the
public peace, they are said to "commit an affray".
Punishment
for
committing
affray
160. Whoever commits an affray, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine
which may extend to one hundred taka, or with both.
Public
servant
taking
gratification
other than
legal
remuneration
in respect of
an official
ac
161. Whoever, being or expecting to be a public servant, accepts or obtains,
or agrees to accept, or attempts to obtain from any person, for himself or for
any other person any gratification whatever, other than legal remuneration,
as a motive or reward for doing or forbearing to do any official act or for
showing or for bearing to show, in the exercise of his official functions,
favour or disfavour to any person, or for rendering or attempting to render
any service or disservice to any person, with the Government or Legislature,
or with any public servant, as such, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or
with both.
Explanations-“Expecting to be a public servant.” If a person not expecting to
be in office obtains a gratification by deceiving others into a belief that he is
about to be in office, and that he will then serve them, he may be guilty of
cheating but he is not guilty of the offence defined in this section.
“Gratification.” The word “gratification” is not restricted to pecuniary
gratifications, or to gratifications estimable in money.
“Legal remuneration.” The words “legal remuneration” are not restricted to
remuneration which a public servant can lawfully demand, but include all
remuneration which is permitted by the authority by which he is employed, to
accept.
“A motive or reward for doing.” A person who receives a gratification as a
motive for doing what he does not intend to do, or as a reward for doing
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 43/47
what he has not done, comes within these words.
Illustrations
(a) A, a munsif, obtains from Z, a banker, a situation in Z's bank for A's
brother, as a reward to A for deciding a cause in favour of Z. A has
committed the offence defined in this section.
(b) A, holding the office of Consul at the Court of a foreign Power, accepts a
lakh of taka from the Minister of that Power. It does not appear that A
accepted this sum as a motive or reward for doing or forbearing to do any
particular official act, or for rendering or attempting to render any particular
service to that Power with the Government of Bangladesh. But it does
appear that A accepted the sum as a motive or reward for generally showing
favour in the exercise of his official functions to that Power. A has committed
the offence defined in this section.
(c) A, a public servant, induces Z erroneously to believe that A's influence
with Government has obtained a title for Z and thus induces Z to give A
money as a reward for this service. A has committed the offence defined in
this section.
Taking
gratification,
in order, by
corrupt or
illegal
means, to
influence
public
servant
162. Whoever accepts or obtains, or agrees to accept, or attempts to obtain,
from any person, for himself or for any other person, any gratification
whatever as a motive or reward for inducing, by corrupt or illegal means, any
public servant to do or to forbear to do any official act, or in the exercise of
the official functions of such public servant to show favour or disfavour to
any person, or to render or attempt to render any service or disservice to
any person with the Government or Legislature, or with any public servant,
as such, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
Taking
gratification,
for exercise
of personal
influence
with public
servant
163. Whoever accepts or obtains, or agrees to accept or attempts to obtain,
from any person, for himself or for any other person, any gratification
whatever, as a motive or reward for inducing, by the exercise of personal
influence, any public servant to do or to forbear to do any official act, or in
the exercise of the official functions of such public servant to show favour or
disfavour to any person, or to render or attempt to render any service or
disservice to any person with the Government or Legislature, or with any
public servant, as such, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a
term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
Illustration
An advocate who receives a fee for arguing a case before a Judge; a person
who receives pay for arranging and correcting a memorial addressed to
Government, setting forth the services and claims of the memorialist; a paid
agent for a condemned criminal, who lays before the Government
statements tending to show that the condemnation was unjust, - are not
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 44/47
within this section, inasmuch as they do not exercise or profess to exercise
personal influence.
Punishment
for
abetment by
public
servant of
offences
defined in
section 162
or 163
164. Whoever, being a public servant, in respect of whom either of the
offences defined in the last two preceding sections is committed, abets the
offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
Illustration
A is a public servant. B, A's wife, receives a present as a motive for soliciting
A to give an office to a particular person. A abets her doing so. B is
punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year, or with
fine, or with both. A is punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
Public
servant
obtaining
valuable
thing,
without
consideration,
from person
concerned
in
proceeding
or business
transacted
by such
public
servant
165. Whoever, being a public servant, accepts or obtains, or agrees to
accept or attempts to obtain, for himself, or for any other person, any
valuable thing without consideration, or for a consideration which he knows
to be inadequate,
from any person whom he knows to have been, or to be, or to be likely to be
concerned in any proceeding or business transacted or about to be
transacted by such public servant, or having any connection with the official
functions of himself or of any public servant to whom he is subordinate,
or from any person whom he knows to be interested in or related to the
person so concerned,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
Illustrations
(a) A, a Collector, hires a house of Z, who has a settlement case pending
before him. It is agreed that A shall pay fifty taka a month, the house being
such that, if the bargain were made in good faith, A would be required to pay
two hundred taka a month. A has obtained a valuable thing from Z without
adequate consideration.
(b) A, a Judge, buys of Z, who has a case pending in A's Court, Government
promissory notes at a discount, when they are selling in the market at a
premium. A has obtained a valuable thing from Z without adequate
consideration.
(c) Z's brother is apprehended and taken before A, a Magistrate, on a
charge of perjury. A sells to Z shares in a bank at a premium, when they are
selling in the market at a discount. Z pays A for the shares accordingly. The
money so obtained by A is a valuable thing obtained by him without
adequate consideration.
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 45/47
Punishment
for
abetment of
offences
defined in
sections
161 and 165
[165A. Whoever abets any offence punishable under section 161 or
section 165 shall, whether the offence abetted is or is not committed in
consequence of the abetment, be punished with the punishment provided
for the offence.]
59
Certain
abettors
excepted
[165B. A person shall be deemed not to abet an offence punishable under
section 161 or section 165 if he is induced, compelled, coerced, or
intimidated to offer or give any such gratification as is referred to in section
161 for any of the purposes mentioned therein, or any valuable thing without
consideration, or for an inadequate consideration, to any such public servant
as is referred to in section 165.]
60
Public
servant
disobeying
law, with
intent to
cause injury
to any
person
166. Whoever, being a public servant, knowingly disobeys any direction of
the law as to the way in which he is to conduct himself as such public
servant, intending to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will, by such
disobedience, cause injury to any person, shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with
both.
Illustration
A, being an officer directed by law to take property in execution, in order to
satisfy a decree pronounced in Z's favour by a Court of Justice, knowingly
disobeys that direction of law, with the knowledge that he is likely thereby to
cause injury to Z. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
Public
servant
framing an
incorrect
document
with intent
to cause
injury
167. Whoever, being a public servant, and being, as such public servant,
charged with the preparation or translation of any document, frames or
translates that document in a manner which he knows or believes to be
incorrect, intending thereby to cause or knowing it to be likely that he may
thereby cause injury to any person, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or
with both.
Public
servant
unlawfully
engaging in
trade
168. Whoever, being a public servant, and being legally bound as such
public servant not to engage in trade, engages in trade, shall be punished
with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with
fine, or with both.
Public
servant
169. Whoever, being a public servant, and being legally bound as such
public servant, not to purchase or bid for certain property, purchases or bids
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 46/47
অধায় এর নাম IXA
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO ELECTIONS
unlawfully
buying or
bidding for
property
for that property, either in his own name or in the name of another, or jointly,
or in shares with others, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a
term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both; and the
property, if purchased, shall be confiscated.
Personating
a public
servant
170. Whoever pretends to hold any particular office as a public servant,
knowing that he does not hold such office or falsely personates any other
person holding such office, and in such assumed character does or attempts
to do any act under colour of such office, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description, for a term which may extend to two
years, or with fine, or with both.
Wearing
garb or
carrying
token used
by public
servant with
fraudulent
intent
171. Whoever, not belonging to a certain class of public servants, wears any
garb or carries any token resembling any garb or token used by that class of
public servants, with the intention that it may be believed, or with the
knowledge that it is likely to be believed, that he belongs to that class of
public servants, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description,
for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend
to two hundred taka, or with both.
61
“Candidate”,
“Electoral
right”
defined
171A. For the purposes of this Chapter -
(a) "candidate" means a person who has been nominated as a candidate at
any election and includes a person who, when an election is in
contemplation, holds himself out as a prospective candidate thereat;
provided that he is subsequently nominated as a candidate at such election;
(b) "electoral right" means the right of a person to stand, or not to stand as,
or to withdraw from being, a candidate or to vote or refrain from voting at an
election.
Bribery 171B. (1) Whoever-
(i) gives a gratification to any person with the object of inducing him or any
other person to exercise any electoral right or of rewarding any person for
having exercised any such right; or
(ii) accepts either for himself or for any other person any gratification as a
reward for exercising any such right or for inducing or attempting to induce
any other person to exercise any such right,
commits the offence of bribery:
Provided that a declaration of public policy or a promise of public action shall
not be an offence under this section.
2/4/2020 The Penal Code, 1860
bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/act-details-11.html 47/47
(2) A person who offers, or agrees to give, or offers or attempts to procure, a
gratification shall be deemed to give a gratification.
(3) A person who obtains or agrees to accept or attempts to obtain a
gratification shall be deemed to accept a gratification, and a person who
accepts a gratification as a motive for doing what he does not intend to do,
or as a reward for doing what he has not done, shall be deemed to have
accepted the gratification as a reward.
Undue
influence at
elections
171C.(1) Whoever voluntarily interferes or attempts to interfere with the free
exercise of any electoral right commits the offence of undue influence at an
election.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1),
whoever
(a) threatens any candidate or voter, or any person in whom a candidate or
voter is interested, with injury of any kind, or
(b) induces or attempts to induce a candidate or voter to believe that he or
any person in whom he is interested will become or will be rendered an
object of Divine displeasure or of spiritual censure,
shall be deemed to interfere with the free exercise of the electoral right of
such candidate or voter, within the meaning of sub-section (1).
(3) A declaration of public policy or a promise of public action, or the mere
exercise of a legal right without intent to interfere with an electoral right, shall
not be deemed to be interference within the meaning of this section.
Personation
at elections
171D. Whoever at an election applies for a voting paper or votes in the
name of any other person, whether living or dead, or in a fictitious name, or
who having voted once at such election applies at the same election for a
voting paper in his own name, and whoever abets, procures or attempts to
procure the voting by any person in any such way, commits the offence of
personation at an election.
Punishment
of bribery
171E. Whoever commits the offence of bribery shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year,
or with fine, or with both:
Provided that bribery by treating shall be punished with fine only.
Explanation.-Treating means that form of bribery where the gratification
consists in food, drink, entertainment, or provision.